# Basic concepts in fact-streams

## Key technical decisions

The term *event* has multiple meanings in software architecture and this often creates a lot confusion. `fact-streams` deliberately uses the term **fact** instead of event to make it clear that it is not related to similarly named technologies and patterns like event-buses, microservices etc.

`fact-stream` is suitable for application that use the monolith architecture. It has been build to allow horizontal scaling nevertheless.

`fact-stream` wraps the native MongoDB driver but does not try to "hide" it. In several places it re-exports MongoDB functions as they are.

## Basic concepts

A **fact** represents an action or an event that took place in the domain. They are the single source of truth. The current state is derived from the facts. They are immutable and represent the business facts. Each fact has a `type` property, which is usually a verb in past tense, and signify what action this fact represents. It also has a `data` property, which contains information about the action.

A **fact stream** is the series of facts about a specific object. For example each user in your system would be a separate stream.

A **fact store** provides a mechanism to append and read facts from individual streams. It is usually a single MongoDB collection. As example would be a `User` collection.

A **view** is some aspect of the current state of the system. It is generated by replaying the facts in the order they occurred. Views can be *transient*, which mean they are generated on-the-fly when we query the data. They can also be *persistent*, which means that every time we append an event fact-streams will replay the facts and store the view's state in another MongoDB collection for more efficient queries.

A **reducer** is a function that takes as input the current state of the application and a single fact, and returns the new state by applying the fact. Reducers are the core mechanism that replay the facts and therefore build the views.
